---
layout: post
title: Emulating Realistic Network Conditions with tc in Docker
tags: Linux networking
---

The Linux command `tc` can add latency to a network interface, constrain its bandwidth, and force it to randomly drop packets.  This command can be applied to a virtual interface (`veth`) inside of a Docker container to test software with realistic network conditions.


# Example: Modifying Latency and Drop Rate

This example walks through the steps to modify the traffic
settings for a Docker container and verify they have been changed using `ping`.

Start an Alpine shell in a container with the capability for 
its network settings to be modified:

```
$ docker run --cap-add NET_ADMIN -it alpine /bin/ash
```

Inside the container, add the `iproute2` package to install 
the `tc` command.  It's not included in the base Alpine distribution.

```
# apk add iproute2
```

Then, try doing a ping (e.g, `ping 8.8.8.8`) before and after
changing the traffic discipline.   This example adds 100 ms of delay with a 25%
packet loss rate.  You should observe an increased time for the pings to return,
along with many of the sessions being dropped.

```
# tc qdisc add dev eth0 root netem delay 100ms loss 25.0%
```

The current `tc` settings can be viewed with `tc -s qdisc`.

The general formats for tc commands are
```
tc qdisc add dev DEV root QDISC QDISC-PARAMETERS
tc qdisc change dev DEV root QDISC QDISC-PARAMETERS
tc qdisc del dev DEV root
```

# TODO

`tc` is often used to shape traffic.  In a future post I will
work through an example of how to do this and verify its performance using
`iperf3`.  The command uses a token bucket filter to limit the egress traffic.

```
tc qdisc change dev eth0 root tbf rate 10kb burst 1540 latency 10ms
```

# References

* [emulating network behaviors](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/614795/simulate-delayed-and-dropped-packets-on-linux#615757)
* [adding latency](https://bencane.com/2012/07/16/tc-adding-simulated-network-latency-to-your-linux-server/)
* [throttling](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/10481032/bandwidth-throttling-using-netem)
