---
layout: post
title: What Happens When a Docker Network Is Created?
tags: docker networking iptables
---

Docker uses two fundamental Linux networking technologies, networking
namespaces and iptables, to allow containers to communicate with each
other and the outside world.  This post uses the Linux commandline
to explore how Docker implements networking with these technologies.
Once you understand how Docker networking works, you will have the power
to extend it to your needs.


# Installation

When Docker is first installed, it does a few actions behind the
scenes to make networking possible:
1. it creates a bridge,
2. it adds its own rules to `iptables`.


## Bridge Creation
Docker creates a bridge called `docker0` which is an assigned an IP
address (`172.17.0.1/16` in this case).  If no network is specified
when a container is created, it is connected to this bridge by
default.

Note that the bridge state is `DOWN`.  The bridge is activated when
a container is connected to it.

{% highlight bash %}
$ brctl show
bridge name bridge id     STP enabled interfaces
docker0     8000.0242a690e758 no

$ ip a
...
3: docker0: <NO-CARRIER,BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue state DOWN group default 
    link/ether 02:42:4d:11:10:f1 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
    inet 172.17.0.1/16 brd 172.17.255.255 scope global docker0
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
...
{% endhighlight %}

## New iptables Rules

Docker adds its own rules in IP tables to isolate containers in
separate networks from each other.  Since there is only one network
here (`docker0`), these rules have no effect.  We will investigate
these rules later when we create other networks.

The default rules are as below.  Docker adds four chains of its own,
`DOCKER`, `DOCKER-ISOLATION-1`, `DOCKER-ISOLATION-2` and
`DOCKER-USER`.  This last chain is a placeholder for users to
implement their own rules (see
[documentation](https://docs.docker.com/network/iptables)).

{% highlight bash %}
$ sudo iptables -S
-P INPUT ACCEPT
-P FORWARD DROP
-P OUTPUT ACCEPT
-N DOCKER
-N DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-1
-N DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-2
-N DOCKER-USER
-A FORWARD -j DOCKER-USER
-A FORWARD -j DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-1
-A FORWARD -o docker0 -m conntrack --ctstate RELATED,ESTABLISHED -j ACCEPT
-A FORWARD -o docker0 -j DOCKER
-A FORWARD -i docker0 ! -o docker0 -j ACCEPT
-A FORWARD -i docker0 -o docker0 -j ACCEPT
-A DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-1 -i docker0 ! -o docker0 -j DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-2
-A DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-1 -j RETURN
-A DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-2 -o docker0 -j DROP
-A DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-2 -j RETURN
-A DOCKER-USER -j RETURN
{% endhighlight %}

`iptables` has an option to group the rules by chain which can make
them more understandable.  From this view, the sequence of chains is:
1. `FORWARD`,
2. `DOCKER-USER`,
3. `DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-1`,
4. `DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-2`,
5. `DOCKER`

{% highlight bash %}
$ sudo iptables -vL

Chain INPUT (policy ACCEPT 8832 packets, 625K bytes)
 pkts bytes target     prot opt in     out     source               destination         

Chain FORWARD (policy DROP 0 packets, 0 bytes)
 pkts bytes target     prot opt in     out     source               destination         
 2022  708K DOCKER-USER  all  --  any    any     anywhere             anywhere            
 2022  708K DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-1  all  --  any    any     anywhere             anywhere            
    0     0 ACCEPT     all  --  any    docker0  anywhere             anywhere             ctstate RELATED,ESTABLISHED
    0     0 DOCKER     all  --  any    docker0  anywhere             anywhere            
    0     0 ACCEPT     all  --  docker0 !docker0  anywhere             anywhere            
    0     0 ACCEPT     all  --  docker0 docker0  anywhere             anywhere            

Chain OUTPUT (policy ACCEPT 11525 packets, 1532K bytes)
 pkts bytes target     prot opt in     out     source               destination         

Chain DOCKER (1 references)
 pkts bytes target     prot opt in     out     source               destination         

Chain DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-1 (1 references)
 pkts bytes target     prot opt in     out     source               destination         
    0     0 DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-2  all  --  docker0 !docker0  anywhere             anywhere            
 1938  701K RETURN     all  --  any    any     anywhere             anywhere            

Chain DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-2 (1 references)
 pkts bytes target     prot opt in     out     source               destination         
   84  7056 DROP       all  --  any    docker0  anywhere             anywhere            
  812 56496 RETURN     all  --  any    any     anywhere             anywhere            

Chain DOCKER-USER (1 references)
 pkts bytes target     prot opt in     out     source               destination         
 2022  708K RETURN     all  --  any    any     anywhere             anywhere            

{% endhighlight %}


# Running a Container

When a container is created with default networking, Docker:
1. creates a new network namespace for the container,
2. creates a virtual Ethernet pair and places one end of the pair in the container's network namespace,
3. hooks the other to the bridge, `docker0`,
4. assigns an IP address to the container's ethernet device,
5. enables the bridge.

Let's run some commands to see evidence of the changes.

First, let's create a container with a simple interactive shell and
check its IP address.  We can see that it has been assigned an address
from the same subnet as the `docker0` bridge.

{% highlight bash %}
$ docker run -it alpine /bin/ash
# ip a
...
30: eth0@if31: ...
   inet 172.17.0.2/16 brd 172.17.255.255 scope global eth0
   ...
{% endhighlight %}

In another shell logged into the host, let's look at what's changed on the
host side.  For one, we now see that `docker0` is `UP`.

We also see that a new interface has appeared.  It's a
[veth](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man4/veth.4.html), a virtual
Ethernet device, which is one half of a pair of devices connected
together by a virtual connection.  The other half of the veth pair has
been placed into the container's network namespace.

{% highlight bash %}
$ ip a
...
3: docker0: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue state UP group default 
    link/ether ...
    inet 172.17.0.1/16 brd 172.17.255.255 scope global docker0
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    ...
31: vethe704058@if30: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue master docker0 state UP group default 
    link/ether ...
    inet6 ...
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever


{% endhighlight %}




# Creating a New Docker Network

Let's create a new docker network named 'test1' and verify its successful
creation[^1]:

     $ docker network create test1
     $ docker network ls

     NETWORK ID     NAME          DRIVER          SCOPE
     aec###         test1         bridge          local

This results in the creation of a new bridge named 'br-###'

     $ ip a
     ...
     5: br-###: <NO-CARRIER,BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP     mtu qdisc noqueue state...
     ...

Another way to see it is using the `brctl` command.

     $ brctl show
     bridge name    bridge id         STP enabled     interfaces
     br-###             8000.###    no

This bridge has an IP subnet assigned to it.  Containers in this network are
assigned addresses from this subnet.

     $ ip r
     ...
     172.19.0.0/16 dev br-### proto kernel scope link src 172.18.0.1 linkdown
     ...

These rules have been added to `iptables`:

     $ sudo iptables -S
     ...
     -A FORWARD -o br-### -m conntrack --ctstate RELATED,ESTABLISHED -j ACCEPT
     -A FORWARD -o br-### -j DOCKER
     -A FORWARD -i br-### ! -o br-### -j ACCEPT
     -A FORWARD -i br-### -o br-### -j ACCEPT
     -A DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-1 -i br-### ! -o br-### -j DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-2
     -A DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE-2 -o br-### -j DROP
     ...

# Using the Network

The link is down until a container is invoked in that network.  As a simple
example, let's invoke a shell in an Ubuntu container running bash.

     $ docker run -it --network=test1 ubuntu /bin/bash
     $ ip r
     ...
     172.19.0.0/16 dev br-### proto kernel scope link src 172.19.0.1
     ...


# Cleaning Up

To remove networks not currently used by containers, first exit the Alpine
shell, then remove the unused network

     $ docker network rm test1

You can verify using the commands above that the bridges and iptables rules have
been deleted

[^1]: All commands run with Docker version 18.09.7, build 2d0083d

